# 16. Array Data Initialization

## TL;DR

- Have you ever looked at the assembly generated by C++ for initializing arrays?
- Where do the values come from?

## Video Overview

- [x] C++ array code ints vs. arrays
- [x] How variables being initialized in assembly?
  - [x] Read assembly code for int init
  - [x] Compare/contrast with int-array init
  - [x] Explain how data is set via `%rip`, `%rax`, `%eax`
  - [x] Explain why `+7` in `%rip+7+0x4e` (CPU NEEDS to read current 7 bytes of instructions BEFORE doing math)
- [x] Where are the values in `%rip` coming from (Why is it outside of program memory?)
- [x] Learn about `objdump -d -s main`
  - [x] `-d` shows `__TEXT,__text` aka assembly code
  - [x] `-s` shows `__TEXT,__const` aka constant strings, array values, global vars
  - [x] Show array values stored in `Contents of section __TEXT,__const`

- [x] Who came up with these seemingly complex rules?
  - [x] Defined by hardware architects (CPU designers), OS designers (MacOS, Windows, etc.), compiler devs
  - [x] Rules are enforced by compilers (Clang, GCC, etc.), OS loaders (kernel), and other systems
- [x] Why did they do it? (Thanks ChatGPT)
  - [x] Security - If CPU tries to write to `\_\_TEXT,\_\_const` address, OS will segfault because it is marked as Read-Only
  - [x] Speed (cache locality) - Data is stored physically right next to the code; when CPU loads main, it often grabs `\_\_const` data
  - [x] Efficiency (shared memory) - The OS loads 1 copy of the `\_\_TEXT` segment into physical RAM, even if you run 10 instances at the same time

## Helpful Commands

### LLDB

```bash
# curr addr + instruction len + assembly value
# 0x100000f3d + 7 + 0x4c

# find memory address of location
p/x (0x100000f3d+0x4c+7)
# (long) 0x0000000100000f90

# Printing values inside rax
(lldb) p/x $rax
# (unsigned long) 0x0000000b00000005 -> 11, 5
(lldb) p/d ((int*)&$rax)[0]
# (int) 5
(lldb) p/d ((int*)&$rax)[1]
# (int) 11
(lldb) register read $rax -f int32
#  rax = {5 11}

# display 5 values at mem location
x/5xd (0x100000f3d+0x4c+7)
# 0x100000f90: 12
# 0x100000f94: 23
# 0x100000f98: 34
# 0x100000f9c: 45
# 0x100000fa0: 56
```

### Bash

```bash

objdump -s -d main

```

## Titles

- Why is the C++ Array "Hidden" in Assembly?
- C++ Assembly Deep Dive: Chasing Where the Data Lives
- Low Level C++: How the Compiler Stores Array Data

- C++ Array Initialization vs. Integer Initialization in Assembly
- Where are Global Variables and Constants Stored in C++?
- How are Global Constants Stored in C++ Binaries?
- How to use objdump -d -s to Debug C++ Binaries?

## Timestamps

- 00:00 todo?

## References

- ChatGPT and Gemini
